build-lists: true
footer: IDM 221: Web Authoring I
slidenumbers: true
autoscale: true


# IDM 221
## Web Design I

---

## Week 7

---

### Page Layout
#### Part 1

^ Part 1 because part 2 is coming next term (RWD, Flexbox, Grids)

---

## Four ways to position an element

---

- position
- top
- bottom
- left
- right
- z-index

^ Use these properties to position elements on a page. Let's look at these individually.

---

# Position

- static
- absolute
- fixed
- relative

^ The `position` property determines how an element is positioned. Possible values are `static`, `absolute`, `fixed` and `relative`. _Static_ is the default value, which means the element is placed in the normal flow of the page. _Absolute_ means the element is removed from the flow and positioned relative to the closest containing block that is also positioned. The position is determined by the top, left, bottom and right properties. _Fixed_ means the element is positioned absolutely relative to the browser window. The position again is determined by the top, left, bottom and right properties. _Relative_ means the element is positioned relative to it's position in the normal flow, again based on the top, left, bottom and right properties. Let's review examples of each. (examples available in _examples_ folder)

---

## z-index

```css
.thing1, .thing2 {
  height: 100px; width: 100px;
  position: absolute;
}

.thing1 {
  left: 0; top: 0;
  z-index: 10;
}

.thing2 {
  left: 20px; top: 20px;
  z-index: 20;
}
```

^ One more property you can use to position elements is `z-index`. This property is useful if an element that you position overlaps another element. Think of it like layers in your graphic design software. (Firefox TILT demo)

---

# Float

^ By default, block elements flow from top to bottom. When you _float_ an element, it's taken out of the flow of the document. Because of that, any elements that follow the floated element flow into the space that's left by the floated element.

---

```html
<div class="wrapper">
  <aside>
    <p>Lorem ipsum...</p>
  </aside>
  <main>
    <p>Lorem ipsum...</p>
  </main>
  <footer>
    <p>Lorem ipsum...</p>
  </footer>
</div>
```

---

```css
main {
  margin: 0;
  padding: 0 20px;
}

aside {
  border: 1px solid black;
  float: right;
  margin: 0 0 10px 20px;
  padding: 0 20px;
  width: 250px;
}
```

^ The basic skills for floating an element include first using the `float` property to define whether you want the element floated to the left or right. You also have to set a width of the floated element. In the example, the `aside` is 250px and floated to the right. The `main` element that follows flows into the space to the left of the `aside`.

---

```css
footer {
  border-top: 1px solid lightgray;
  clear: both;
  font-size: 0.88rem;
}
```

^ By default, any content that follows the floated element will fill in the space to the side of the floated element. If you want to stop the flow of elements into the space behind a floated element, you can use the `clear` property. In this example, this property is used to stop the `footer` from flowing into the space next to the `aside`. The value of this property can be _left_, _right_ or _both_ and works whether the floated element is floated to the left or right.

---

## Float Examples

- Basics
- 2 Column Fixed Width
- 2 Column Fluid Width
- Grid System

^ Examples are available in the _examples_ folder.

---

# For Next Week...
## Work!
